Hi, it's wonderful to see you here. It's been a great conference with lots of deep and technical conversations
But my presentation isn't technical. I just want you to have some fun and hear my story
Every story got a lesson and mine isn't different. It has a few and I hope you enjoy them and find them useful
Imagine this
You are a team of professional swimmers. You've been swimming in the swimming pool for years for 20 years
The temperature has been comfortable. The water is calm. Each swimmer has their own lane
it's warm bright and cozy and
One day you are told that the pool will be closing forever
You will have to learn how to swim in the open waters in the ocean that you've never seen before let alone swamming
Your imagination goes wild
strong winds
rough shores, scary creatures
It's how we felt in my organization when we started that migration
When we decided to move from proprietary toolkit to open source R and Python
My name is Katerina Gapanenko
I work at the Canadian Institute for Health Information a national organization
That's for 30 years collects analyzes and reports health information
There I led a project of this massive
transformation from proprietary toolkit to open source
we have over 350 analysts and we have tons of code and over 500 products and
Some of the code has been developed 20 years ago by people who are not longer with the organization and we treat this code as
Vintage wine. Today, I would like to share the story of our transformation
It was a multi-year massive project with a lot of stories to tell
One presentation ago you heard Yvonne Kina's story
She was talking about the ripples of change her story was about the same project as mine
But I'd like to share my perspective as the business owner
I will tell you everything from the beginning to the end from top to bottom and
If you're considering a similar transformation in your organization, you may find both stories useful
So three years ago, we stood at the edge of a cliff the water looked powerful, but intimidating
We couldn't just test the waters. We needed to jump so we did but why we jumped
first
Sustainability proprietary toolkit has been our safe pool for years
Stable vendor-supported
but inflexible and
Expensive and it was hard to integrate into existing
Workflows and we were modernizing our workflows as well
Second the talent more and more analysts coming to the organization with existing R and Python knowledge
They were frustrated with our outdated tools
Our existing staff were curious about what's going on outside of these proprietary tools in the open waters
Innovation and collaboration
We couldn't just keep up with the speed of a modern data science if we stayed in this closed ecosystem
We felt that we were missing the boat in this one. And that is why we decided to go from
closed
tools from proprietary tools to open source
Very quickly way and discovered three things that could pull us under
Technical hurdles we needed to build new environment new ideas
Parallel computing get we needed to learn all about all these tools
And we felt at that time that we see just a tip of the iceberg
Then the next one is cultural resistance
Learning in general is emotional like waves. It comes with excitement frustration anxiety and joy
Learning major skills at work is even more difficult
As an organization we understood that this change will not be smooth
The workload we had a lot of product to deliver
We had too little time to learn and we had no time to migrate the code
The constant pressure
Circled beneath us as sharks if we didn't address it, it could have been fatal
To help us overcome all these three dangers
We built three aids at three different levels at the organizational level. We built executive support
At the project level. We built a diverse project leading team a small team and
At the individual level at the analyst level we built mentorship and training programs
These three aids help us to survive and succeed without them. We might have sunk
Executive support I see the executive support as a lighthouse as the beacon guiding everyone through the rough waters
Steady and visible and given directions
We started gradually at the beginning. We plan to migrate 50% of our code in several years
But it was very challenging to figure out how to split the organization in two
How do we go about it? Is it gonna be right hand and left leg?
Is it gonna be ways up and ways down how to decide who will stay in the closed?
Environment and who will go and try the open open waters open source at the same time
we started talking to a lot of external organizations who started the same transition as ours and
All of them who maintain and maintain two systems at the same time told us that it was very challenging
Because you and they needed to maintain two servers
They needed to maintain two groups of analysts and it was difficult to collaborate among analysts and share their code
so we came back to our analysts and to our executive team and we explained to them all these challenges and
With their support we decided to make one bold call
single hard deadline every script every data set and every analyst
Our executive gave us space and cleared our workload
They made learning a priority for everyone in the organization
They showed their support and they were a part of our celebrations
We created a few KPIs to tell about the progress in training
immigration and in the environment adoption
Our second success factor was the project leading team itself
Think about it as a rescue team with diverse strengths and skills and tools
small versatile and ready for our waters and designed to save lives
We had different strengths and different skills some of us new hi-hi business
Others new hi-hi products very well and the legacy code
Others new are in Python, but some of us were not technical at all
But they were able to read the room and manage emotions and they were able to organize all
Sorts of events that we had throughout the projects
Others were great with project management and reporting
We were just a handful of people with different strengths, but we were bound by the same mission
But despite of our diversity we operated as one crew. We did everything together
brainstorming making decision
Executing and we did it fast because we trusted each other
And we build trust around us
We instilled trust in analysts that they could learn and they could deliver
We build trust with executives that our project team could deliver. We showed everyone that the project would succeed
That mean being honest about challenging
Listening to everyone's worries trying to unpack those of worries and get to the bottom of their concerns and show empathy
All this communication took time and patience in many cases we needed to adjust people as expectations
And tell them in advance what's happening in some case in case
Adjusting expectations wasn't easy. I will give just one example
At the very beginning our analyst felt that the new environment should be as stable as the old environment
So in in in other words, they didn't expect the ocean water to be salty with seagrass and jellyfish
So we had to explain to them in several different ways and several at several different occasions. That is not the case
But through this communication, we also understood their worries
We understood what was the barrier for them and why stable communication stable environment was important for them
So eventually we were we were adjusting their expectations, but we also
Change our view on what they were worried about so we found the middle ground
The whole transformation wasn't just technical. It's also
Emotional and it's the emotional in the first place
Understanding acknowledging addressing people's worries is at most important
Then the training when we realized how much code we need to migrate
We started looking elsewhere to understand how we can deliver the project within the time frame that we set
We explored hiring external gurus or hiring an army of co-op students
Outsourcing the whole thing outside of our organization or using automation
We waited all these options and decided to invest in our analyst in the people we already had
We wanted to equip our analyst with the tools and skills and support they needed
We knew analysts couldn't just jump in the waters and start swimming so we built a learning
ecosystem for them
We created variety of options for everyone to choose from it was self-paced or in class short long
Created inside the house or off-the-shelf courses at the beginning
They benefited the most from our courses that we built ourselves
Ourselves with our data and our use cases where we showed our code and converted it throughout the course
Later, they were comfortable
With learning taking courses off the shelf and learning by themselves on their own
Those who were scared to start we organized code alone and get together events
Where in small groups people were sitting next to each other
Actually in the same class with the support of mentor
They were doing a project together a small little project but together that helped a lot
We also gave people JNAI tools and
Not to write the code but to learn
To learn the code that was created by somebody else who left the organization ages ago and forgot to leave any
documentation whatsoever
we they use these JNAI tools to
Convert the existing code into pseudocode in plain English code to understand and better and to find efficiencies and
also to
To learn the new code that was created by somebody else in the team
One analyst called charge BT a patient mentor a tutor
Available day and night to answer their questions that were honestly embarrassed to ask their neighbors
Their the neighbors in the in in the office or their mentor
Altogether our analyst completed
40,000 hours of training they were
Scared at the beginning and we were scared to give them that much training
But at the end they appreciated the the challenge and one analyst said learning was fun
I appreciated the opportunity it brought excitement to my day-to-day work
But the real game-changer was structured mentorship
We hired a brand new team of mentors not based on their sharpest code, but based on their
ability to teach and ability to create
psychological safety
Every team got a mentor and every mentor supported several teams. They were providing technical support
Answering questions help me sue the code with our in Python code with server questions
They also helped build confidence in
Analysts, they were talking to them individually and in group
They comment them down if it's needed every team went through
Emotional transformation along the project
But the way the mentors support they felt safer their words not mine
To see our project on one slide as one image think of our journey like being out in the open water
There is a lighthouse the executive support that is steady visible and kept us oriented
No matter how rough the waters got it cleared the workload and gave us space to learn
Then it's a small diverse and trusted crew
Roaring and sink and providing support to everyone and building trust in everyone
They listen they supported they encouraged they appreciated the effort
and
Then the swimmers in the water
Analysts equipped with training
Mentors and the safety net to admit that they didn't know something put together
That's how the transformation became possible
When we first stepped into the ocean of open source the waves looked big and the current felt strong
But today we're not just staying afloat. We are swimming
confidently together
We made the leap by investing in our own analysts together
350 people migrated one and a half million lines of code over
500 products and over
18,000 data sets today hundred percent of our work is happening in R and Python
We started sharing our code internally inside our organization
We are donating pieces of our code in the common code repository
our
analysts our old culture
isolated and cautious now
Slowly, but surely has been changing to something more collaborative and more experimental and this is only
the shoreline
the future
The ocean hasn't gotten any smaller tech keeps evolving
Open source keeps expanding health data science keeps raising ahead and that's okay
Because now we are ready for it. We keep learning keep pushing and keep building in the future
We can focus on speeding up our delivery and that will give us time to learn something new and to innovate
Today, we are not the same organization as before. We didn't just adopt open source
We adopted openness
We see ourselves
Contributing to public open source projects now many of our clients and partners in Canada and abroad have started
Exploring open source tools same as us. They started coming to us and asking for advice
for our recipe for success
So today we are not just swimming ourselves. We are guiding others through their own transformation
We are making ripples beyond our organization
I will leave you with this if you're standing at your own cliff wondering whether to jump
Don't wait for the waters to feel warm. If we could do it slow heavy legacy bound organization
You can do it too. My advice jump in the water is fine
Behind this transformation was a team of people who made it happen
We have more lessons to share so if you want to talk to us, here is how you can reach us. Thank you